QUARKUS-5615 Add test plans for reflection-free (de)serialization (#195)
quarkus-qe/quarkus-test-plans: QUARKUS-5615.md

> ## Links to the resources

Reviewer: Title is missing

Author: Title added

- JIRA ticket: https://issues.redhat.com/browse/QUARKUS-5615

> - Upstream documentation PR: https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/46182

Reviewer: PR link for deserializers functionality https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/42954 is missing

Author: Added the link

- Follow-up to the original PR: https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/46211
- Serialisation PR: https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/41063

> - Serialisation documentation PR: https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/42289

Reviewer: Add one more level to have serializers related content in one sub-tree and deserializers in another one

Author: Changed the structure

- Related guide: https://quarkus.io/guides/rest#reflection-free-jackson-serialization

## Scope of the testing 
This feature adds a new Quarkus property (`quarkus.rest.jackson.optimization.enable-reflection-free-serializers`) which should not affect behavior of Quarkus.
If this property is activated for a project which uses Jackson for rest endpoints, but doesn't use advanced Jackson annotations (anything, besides @JsonProperty and @JsonIgnore), then Quarkus will use compile-time (de)serialisation, which is a bit faster, than the runtime-one.

## Getting familiar with the feature
- Read the guides:
 * https://quarkus.io/guides/rest#reflection-free-jackson-serialization
 * https://quarkus.io/blog/quarkus-metaprogramming/

## Community status of the extension/feature:

> Affected extensions (REST and Jackson) are supported, but the feature itself is in Technology Preview.

Reviewer: Technology Preview status is planned for product, you are mixing it here with community. Please adjust the wording.

Author: I took the info from upstream guide: https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/46182/files

Upstream guide describes community release, no?

Reviewer: ok, upstream usually uses just `Preview` keyword and product `Technology Preview` as it's a thing defined by RH policy https://access.redhat.com/support/offerings/techpreview

## Automated test development

> To get maximum coverage against breaking changes, add this property to every module of main TS, which uses Jackson. Add test method (one per module), which detects, that serialisation class was generated. Make sure, that this test doesn't affect compilation (avoid using reflection, try checking folder with generated classes instead).

Reviewer: `To get maximum coverage against breaking changes, add this property to every module of main TS, which uses Jackson.` ... this means the default code path for serialization and deserialization won't be tested anymore.

Please think about different approach.

Note: For local experiment's to identify as many issues as possible, it a good strategy to add this property to every module of main TS that uses Jackson. But it's not ideal as a final thing to land in the TS.

Author: Suggested a different approach

> Since this change is affecting speed, add this property to Startstop TS as well (module app-full-microprofile seems to be a good candidate due to /src/main/java/com/example/quarkus/serialization/ folder).

Reviewer: StartStopTS is used by other team, recently it was integrated into upstream performance testing efforts, this would change the behaviour and invalidate the comparison with previous numbers.

Please do not adjust StartStopTS with this property.

Author: Removed the suggestion

#### Impacted resources
The building time may become slightly longer, while current tests should run slightly faster. Both of these changes should be negligible for our use cases. One more test per module may add some time to compilation and running times and consume more RAM, but the impact should be minimal.   

> 

Reviewer: I miss details if this functionality can have some overlap with other extension, e.g. qute when and json object is received from the endpoint invocation and than used in the template when rendering response for the request.

Author: There is a problem with testing in native mode, since we can not check the binaries themselves (without debugger) and using reflection for classes will affect the compilation itself. Could you share the issue you filled?

Reviewer: The app failed to build - https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/42774

We do not need to debug things, just ensure expected behaviour aka the tests need to pass with the property enabled.

Author: Correction: I took a look into Native guides[1], and was pleased to know, that GraalVM is not as smart as I thought and reflection should not affect compilation that much (except inclusion of java reflection classes in the image). Will add the note about native message.

[1] https://www.graalvm.org/22.2/reference-manual/native-image/guides/build-with-reflection/

Generate Jackson serializers and deserializers
## Links to the resources
- JIRA ticket: https://issues.redhat.com/browse/QUARKUS-5615
- Serialization:
    - PR: https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/41063
    - Follow-up to the original PR: https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/46211
    - Documentation PR: https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/42289
- Deserialization:
    - PR: https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/42954
    - Documentation PR: https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/46182
- Related guide: https://quarkus.io/guides/rest#reflection-free-jackson-serialization

## Scope of the testing 
This feature adds a new Quarkus property (`quarkus.rest.jackson.optimization.enable-reflection-free-serializers`) which should not affect behavior of Quarkus.
If this property is activated for a project which uses Jackson for reactive rest endpoints, but doesn't use advanced Jackson annotations (anything, besides @JsonProperty and @JsonIgnore), then Quarkus will use compile-time (de)serialisation, which is a bit faster, than the runtime-one.

## Getting familiar with the feature

> - Read the guides:
>  * https://quarkus.io/guides/rest#reflection-free-jackson-serialization
>  * https://quarkus.io/blog/quarkus-metaprogramming/

Reviewer 2: Looking at rendered document and it seems like GH don't aply indend. Probably missing one space

```suggestion
- Read the guides:
  * https://quarkus.io/guides/rest#reflection-free-jackson-serialization
  * https://quarkus.io/blog/quarkus-metaprogramming/
```

## Community status of the extension/feature:

> Affected extension ('quarkus-rest-jackson') is supported, but the feature itself is in Technology Preview.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Affected extension (`quarkus-rest-jackson`) is supported, but the feature itself is in Technology Preview.
```

## Automated test development
To get maximum coverage against breaking changes, add this property to every module of main TS, which uses Jackson. Add test method (one per module), which detects, that serialisation class was generated. Make sure, that this test doesn't affect compilation (avoid using reflection, try checking folder with generated classes instead). Make sure, that these tests run in native mode ()

#### Impacted resources
The building time may become slightly longer, while current tests should run slightly faster. Both of these changes should be negligible for our use cases. One more test per module may add some time to compilation and running times and consume more RAM, but the impact should be minimal.   

> 

Author: @rsvoboda could you elaborate on Qute interoperability? I thought Qute doesn't use json anywhere.

Reviewer: https://quarkus.io/guides/qute-reference#vertx_integration has an example with `JsonObject`

    - Documentation PR: https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/42289
- Deserialization:
    - PR: https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/42954
    - Documentation PR: https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/46182
- Related guide: https://quarkus.io/guides/rest#reflection-free-jackson-serialization

## Scope of the testing 
This feature adds a new Quarkus property (`quarkus.rest.jackson.optimization.enable-reflection-free-serializers`) which should not affect behavior of Quarkus.
If this property is activated for a project which uses Jackson for reactive rest endpoints, but doesn't use advanced Jackson annotations (anything, besides @JsonProperty and @JsonIgnore), then Quarkus will use compile-time (de)serialisation, which is a bit faster, than the runtime-one.

## Getting familiar with the feature
- Read the guides:
  * https://quarkus.io/guides/rest#reflection-free-jackson-serialization
  * https://quarkus.io/blog/quarkus-metaprogramming/

## Community status of the extension/feature:
Affected extension (`quarkus-rest-jackson`) is supported, but the feature itself is in Technology Preview.

## Automated test development

> To get maximum possible coverage, while also keeping the coverage of classic way, add this property to module, which uses reactive jackson for both serialization and deserialization. Module `rest-client-reactive` looks like a promising candidate. Add test method , which detects, that serialization classes were generated.

Reviewer: `rest-client-reactive` is acceptable, I originally was thinking about new module, but this could work. Just make sure to update the readme in the module to mention that reflection-free (de)serialization is enabled in the module

> Additionally, add tests to Qute module, so it will check that template can be rendered with JSON using the new (de)serialization    

Reviewer: Pleas add mew line above and below this line so the rendering is better. Now it's all in one paragraph -- https://github.com/quarkus-qe/quarkus-test-plans/blob/a035a27c86844222240399b71db942b5784960ad/QUARKUS-5615.md#automated-test-development

Generate Jackson serializers and deserializers
## Links to the resources
- JIRA ticket: https://issues.redhat.com/browse/QUARKUS-5615
- Serialization:
    - PR: https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/41063
    - Follow-up to the original PR: https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/46211
    - Documentation PR: https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/42289
- Deserialization:
    - PR: https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/42954
    - Documentation PR: https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/46182
- Related guide: https://quarkus.io/guides/rest#reflection-free-jackson-serialization

## Scope of the testing 
This feature adds a new Quarkus property (`quarkus.rest.jackson.optimization.enable-reflection-free-serializers`) which should not affect behavior of Quarkus.

> If this property is activated for a project which uses Jackson for reactive rest endpoints, but doesn't use advanced Jackson annotations (anything, besides @JsonProperty and @JsonIgnore), then Quarkus will use compile-time (de)serialisation, which is a bit faster, than the runtime-one.

Reviewer 3: _reactive rest endpoints_ I think using _reactive_ is confusing because endpoints themselves don't need to be reactive, you are referring to the former name that contained _reactive_. It is not the first time I saw this, I suggest that in feature we will use the official new name: Quarkus REST client.
